Hello, hello. Peter and Calvin,
welcome back to Talk Python to both of you.
It's great to be here.
Great to be here. Thanks for having us.
Yeah. I know you both are very passionate technologists
and Pythonistas and we're going to dive
into some really exciting things.
What do people need to know as developers and data scientists in 2025?
I'm going to take a wild guess and bet that these trends,
most of them carry over to 2026, which is a few months.
So let's just really quickly have both of you introduce yourselves,
just because not everyone has had a chance to listen to every episode.
And even if they did, they may not remember.
So Peter, welcome.
Who are you?
PETER WANG: Hi, I'm Peter Wang.
I'm a founder of Anaconda and the creator of the PyData community.
And I'm sort of leading the advocacy, at least,
and been at the center of evangelism for the use of Python
in the data science and machine learning world
for over 12 years now, I think 13 years at this point.
But my day job is at Anaconda, I'm the chief AI officer.
So I work on open source, community projects, innovation,
looking at AI things and how that impacts our community
and our users and what good could look like there for us.
I mean, there's a lot of discussion on AI, of course,
good, bad, and ugly.
And I'm really trying to figure out if we as responsible open source community stewards, you know, want to have something meaningful to say here.
What are the right things to do?
So that's what I spend a lot of my time focused on.
Yeah, that's really good work.
Yeah, it's really good work.
And congrats with all the access you've had at Anaconda.
It's made a serious dent.
You were featured in or you were part of the Python documentary, right?
That's right.
Yeah, that was really great.
I really appreciated your words in there.
Thank you.
Yeah, that was great.
really honor to be included in that.
Well, tell people, I haven't technically talked about it on the documentary or the documentary
on the podcast very much.
So you just give people a quick rundown on what that is and why they should check it out.
Well, well, anyone who's listening to this podcast should absolutely watch the documentary
because it is just got a cast of characters telling the story about how our favorite programming
language came to be.
All of the, not all, okay, not all, but some of the travails that have challenged us as
the community over the period of time since its inception,
30 years ago at this point.
It's just a really fun, nice.
I think it's weird because Python has been around forever,
and yet in many respects,
we are still, the world is changing,
and I think there's lots of amazing new opportunities
for Python as a language.
We've been growing so fast and so much,
and evolving as a language and as a community.
This documentary, I think, is a nice way to sort of like check in and say, oh, wow, we got to here and here's the journey we've been on.
And that gives us almost the space to then be a little bit more intentional about talking about where we want to go from here, which I think is something very important that we need to do as a community.
So anyway, I just really liked it from philosophically speaking from that perspective.
But it's also just fun just to get the perspectives like the CPython core maintainers and the BDFL and all the stuff on just the language over the years.
Yeah, I thought it was really excellent.
The production value is amazing.
I enjoyed it tremendously.
I really loved hearing all the old stories.
I've been around for a long time in the community
and seen all the familiar faces,
and I feel like it gives a face and a level of empathy
to the community that's needed.
Yeah, I would say that the production quality
was almost as good as Calvin's camera here.
You always look great on these streams.
Welcome. Tell people about yourself.
Thank you, Michael. I appreciate that.
well i guess i guess i can give a quick introduction um i'm calvin hendrix parker i'm cto and co-founder
of six feet up we are a python and ai consulting agency who helps impactful tech leaders solve the
hard problems i've been in the python community for ages um i probably don't outnumber peter in
in years but at least since 2000 i've been involved i started with zoep and and then through that the
plone community got very involved in the governance that open source project and now we do a lot of
Django a lot of other python open source data projects like airflow for example i think that's
on the list for later and so we just enjoy hanging out and being an awesome group of folks
who love solving the hard problems yeah excellent yeah you've been doing it longer than me for sure
i'm the baby well 2000 is about when i got involved in python as well so okay the old
mail was supposed to be maybe from 99 but but basically 2000 yeah my first pike on was 2003
and i think there were 250 people in the room uh it was amazing yeah you actually beat me by a
couple years i went to i went to 05 was my first one at uh george washington university i think it
was yeah in dc it was about 200 something people yeah they had a track and the keynote speakers
Wow.
I've only been doing this since 2011, so I'm just barely getting started.
That used to seem pretty recent ago, but it doesn't anymore, oddly.
No, it turns out it was, yeah, it's a long time ago.
We're halfway through the 2020s now.
It's crazy.
Yeah.
When you said 2025, things that developers should learn in 2025, I was like, is this a
science fiction movie we're talking about?
Exactly.
What is this like?
It's a dystopian science fiction movie.
the same crap we had to deal with in 2010.
Mostly.
Although async back then, it was interesting.
We didn't have, you know, we had statless, I guess.
There's, I don't know, 2010.
There's tornado.
Yeah, there were various async systems.
Anyway, Celery, yeah.
Wow.
We've got free-threaded Python now.
We do.
The future is now.
Yes.
Almost.
We almost have free-threaded Python.
Yeah.
Spoiler alert.
That may make an appearance in one of the topics.
Well, we may not get to, yeah, we'll have 20 things, but they may not be 20 big, bold items, right?
Yeah.
We have a list of things we want to go through.
That's right.
Peter, we reserve the right to design the designation of the size of the buckets that define the things.
The things, that's right.
But I think the plan is we're going to just riff on some ideas we think are either emerging or current important trends or even foundational things that people should be paying attention to.
in the zeitgeist right now, right?
What are things that maybe you haven't necessarily
been tracking or you've heard of,
but you're like, ah, I haven't got time for that
or it's not for me yet.
So I think that'll be fun.
Let's start with you, Peter.
What's your first, we all gathered up a couple of things
that we think might be super relevant.
And yeah, what do you think?
So I think, well, let's just get started with it.
Let's just talk about the free threading bit.
And let's really, because this is kind of,
it touches the past and it also really takes us
into the future and it's this thing that has taken
quite some time to emerge.
I think the GIL has been a topic of discussion
since as long as I've been using Python.
And finally we have courtesy of the team at Meta,
an excellent set of patches that delivered
true free threading to Python.
And of course this is both a blessing and a curse, right?
You should be careful what you ask for
is now we end up having to deal with true free threading in Python.
And for those who maybe are not so familiar with this whole topic,
the global interpreter lock, we call it GIL, G-I-L for short,
the global interpreter lock is how the Python virtual machine protects its innards.
And so when you use Python and you write code,
even if you use threading, like the threading module in Python,
ultimately the CPython interpreter itself as a system-level process,
it only has one real thread and it has this global interpreter lock that locks many of the internals of the interpreter.
The problem is that sometimes you want to have real multi-threading and so you have to release this global interpreter lock.
And doing this is hard to get right, especially if you reach into C modules and whatnot.
The most popular C modules are pretty good at handling this kind of thing.
NumPy and others come to mind.
So we get really great performance from those when they release the GIL.
But if you want to actually do a lot of Python logic in multiple threads,
you end up essentially getting no lift whatsoever by using a threading module
with classic single-threaded or gill-locked Python.
With the free threading, you actually now are able to have threads running in parallel,
touching things like free lists and stuff like that
and module definitions in the interpreter itself.
Now, what this means is a lot of Python modules or packages, which had been developed when Python was implicitly single threaded,
they now have the potential of thread contention, race conditions, all sorts of weird and unexpected behavior when they're used in a free threaded way.
So we have this patch, we have this change now for free threading in the Python interpreter itself.
However, what that means is we have to make sure that all of the rest of the package ecosystem is updated and tested to work with free-threaded Python.
So in Python 3.13, it was incorporated as an experimental.
It was in the code base, but it was a build time feature.
So you have to compile your own Python interpreter and turn on that flag to get a version of the interpreter that would be free-threaded.
In 3.14, it is now supported in the interpreter.
It's still not turned on by default.
And then at some indeterminate date, it will be turned on by default.
The classic behavior with the global turbo block will still always be there as a fallback for safety and compatibility and all that.
But anyway, we're right now at the point where the core CPython team has said, hey, we're ready to take this thing to supported mode and let the bugs flow.
right so like um so now if you go and install python a python build with um it actually has
a different abi tag so see it's uh cp313 or 314 t for you know um for threading or free threading
um so that's available through you know python.org there's a condo build for it as well and um so
right now there's actually a page maybe we'll have the link for it i think in the in the show notes
right but there's a page that lists what the status is think of the free threaded wheels
and right now 105 out of 360 that are passing basically having the maintainers have updated them
and this is out of the top like oh there that's great yeah out of the top 500 python packages
something like this so you can see we have as a community a lot of work to do so the call to
to action here is not only should a Python developer learn this because this is definitely
coming and everyone has a multi-core machine now. So this is definitely coming, but you
can also, this is a great way to give back. You know, we talk about in the open source
community oftentimes, how do we get starter bugs in there for people to start becoming
contributing members of the community? This is a great way to give back. If there's some
packages you see here that are yellow, you're like, wait, I use AIoHTTP. Like, let me go
and test that with free threading and see if I can bang, you know, just beat it up with
my code in production and see like what fails there. So these are a great way for the community
to really get back and help us test and make sure all this works on what is certainly to be the next
generation of the Python interpreter. Yeah, there was a great talk at DjangoCon just two weeks ago
by Michael Lyle. He gave a talk about using free threading in Django. And I think right now your
mileage may vary was the answer. Like it kind of depends. I can only imagine going through and
trying to commit and help.
Threading is hard.
It sounds like free threading is harder
to wrap your brain around.
So I think it'd be tricky for someone starting
and learning something new.
This may be on the more advanced edge
of what someone should be learning.
It's more for the advanced, crotchety,
you know, like, you know, senior developers,
I ain't got time to contribute to open source.
You can, you can make your own life better.
We can all sort of, this is the sort of stone soup
or good old Amish barn raising.
We should all get together and chip in.
But you're right, debugging async free threading issues is definitely not a beginner kind of task.
Sure, but there's a lot of people who do have that experience from probably more from other languages or C extensions who could jump in, right?
Yeah, actually, you know, if you're a C++ developer who has been forced to use Python because of our success of driving the growth and adoption of the community,
and you're really angry about this and you want to show other ways that Python is broken,
This is a great way to show how Python is broken.
It's to test really gnarly async and multi-threaded use cases.
Actually, one thing about this that I will point out for the more advanced users,
Dave Beasley gave a great talk years ago at PyCon about Python parallelism
and are you IO bound, are you CPU bound?
I think he was looking at, maybe it was actually relative to PyPy, P-Y-P-Y,
and it wasn't about async in particular,
but it was a rolling of distributed computing
or something like this.
I forget the exact title,
but he did a deep analysis of when are we CPU bound
or when are we IO bound and when are we CPU bound.
When we get to free threading Python like this,
I think we're going to, as a community,
be faced with having to up-level our thinking
about this kind of thing.
Because so far we've done a lot of like,
oh, delegating CPU bound numeric stuff
to like Python or Pandas or Cython.
But with this, now we can really play first class
in system level code.
And we have to think more deeply about
how are we blocking events?
How are we handling things?
Is this, you know, is this a, you know, event polling kind of thing?
Or is this more of a completion port thing?
Like in Windows, you have different options.
So this is a very interesting topic, actually.
It goes quite deep.
It goes very deep.
And I think it's going to be a big mental lift for people in the community, generally speaking.
I talk to a lot of people, as you know, from the podcast, and then also interact with a lot of people teaching.
And I don't see a lot of people stressing about thread safety.
or any of those kinds of things these days.
And I think in general,
it's just not in the collective thinking
to be really worried about it.
There are still cases in multi-threaded Python code
where you need to take a lock
because it's not one line's going to deadlock another
or something like that,
but you've got to take five steps.
And if you get interrupted somewhere in those five steps,
the guilt could still theoretically interrupt you
in the middle of code, right?
It still could be in a temporarily invalid state across more than one line.
But I just don't see people even doing anything hardly at it at all.
And when we just uncork this on them, it's going to be something.
And I don't think we're going to see deadlocks as a problem first.
I think we're going to see race conditions.
Because deadlocks require people already having locks there that get out of order.
And I just think the locks are not there.
Then people are going to put the locks there.
And they're like, whoa, it just stopped.
It's total chaos.
It's not using CPU anymore.
What is it doing?
Well, now you found the deadlock.
You added the deadlock, right?
Yeah.
So it's going to be a challenge.
But the potential on the other side of this,
if you can get good at it, it's going to be amazing.
Even on my little cheapo Mac mini, I've got 10 cores.
If I run Python code, unless I do really fancy tricks
or multiple processes, the best I can get is like 10%.
Yeah, and I know this might be a little bit of a spicy take, but like there was, I think, a line that was being held by the CPython core team that we will accept a GIL removal or a gillectomy as it was called.
We'll accept a GIL removal patch when it doesn't affect or negatively impact single core performance, right?
And like when that first came out in 2000, I think that first time I heard that article was a 2005, 6, 7 timeframe.
Back then, that was almost a defensible position.
Nowadays, you can't find a smartphone with a single core.
You know, I can't find a Raspberry Pi.
A $5 Raspberry Pi has dual cores.
So it's like I get the general gist of that, but, like, come on.
We have, like, 90 – like, you know, John Carmack's on Twitter talking about 96-core Threadripper performance with Python.
You know, we sort of need to lean into that, right?
So I'm really, really bullish on this.
Because, as you know, like, I'm very close to the data science and machine learning and the AI use cases.
And those are all just, you know,
they're looking for whatever language
gives us the best performance.
Right now, it happens to Python.
If we as a community,
and we as evangelists of that community,
if we don't lead into that and those users,
they will happily go somewhere else.
I mean, that is bonusing people $100 million to start.
They're not going to wait for your language to catch up.
They'll make a new language, right?
But I think if there was something in 2025
that these developers should be learning along these lines
would be just async programming
and when it should be used.
That's probably the really tactical maneuver today.
Yeah, I agree.
I think the ASIC and await keywords are super relevant.
And the frameworks, I think, will start to take advantage of it.
We're going to see what comes along with this free threading.
But there's no reason you couldn't await a thread
rather than await an I-O operation.
You know what I mean?
My background is C++ and C#.
and C# is actually where async and await came from,
from Anders Halsberg, I believe.
And over there, you don't care if it's IO or compute bound.
You just await some kind of async thing.
It's not your job to care how it happens.
So I think we're going to start to see that.
But it's going to take time for those foundational layers
to build for us to build on.
Yeah.
Yeah, Pamela Fox out in the audience
throws out that last time she really used locks
was in my code for operating system class in college.
It doesn't come up much in web dev.
That's true.
A lot of the times the web, it's at the web framework,
the web server level, the app server level, right?
It's Granian or it's UVicorn or something like that.
That thing does the threading and you just handle one
of the requests.
I literally just deadlocked and I guess probably broke the website
for a couple people at Talk Python today
because I have this analytics operation that's
fixing up a bunch of stuff.
And it ran for like 60 seconds.
Even though there's multiple workers, something about the fan out,
it still sent some of the traffic to the one that was bound up.
And then those things were timing out after 20 seconds.
I'm like, oh, no, what have I done?
And if that was true threading, it wouldn't have mattered.
It would have used up one of my eight cores,
and the rest would have been off jamming along.
It would have been fine, you know?
Well, sort of, right?
And I think this is – I'm really glad Pamela brought this up
because when we're focused on a particular just the worker thread,
it's like, okay, what am I doing?
Pull this, run that, and then push this thing out.
But if you start getting to more,
anytime you start having either value-dependent
or heterogeneous sort of workload
and time boundaries for these tasks,
you start having to think about thread contention.
You start, you know, it's, I mean, to your point, Calvin, I think it's not so far that you have to go before you quickly find yourself thinking about things like Grand Central Dispatch, like macOS has, or IO completion ports.
And like, oh, crap, I'm actually slamming.
It's not under certain cases, you know, to your point about the analytics, maybe you're not doing a GPU-based analytics thing, but maybe you're slamming a bunch of stuff to disk or loading a bunch of stuff up from disk.
And you start getting all these things where at some point, one of these things is the bottleneck.
Is it the CPU? Is it the code itself? Is it the disk? Is it the network?
And you're just slamming your code into one of these different boundaries stochastically.
And as a developer, maybe as an entry-level developer, you don't have to think about it too much.
But as any kind of a mid to senior developer, you're going to be running into these problems.
And they are going to be stochastic. They are value-dependent.
You're gonna hit them in production and you have to sort of know what,
what could bite you, even if it's not biting you all the time in dev.
Right. You,
you remove one bottleneck and it starts to slam into a different part.
Maybe you take them to the debate database and it's even a worse consequence.
You never know, right? We're going to see, it's going to be interesting.
But thinking about that in production,
you've got new new challenges there because you may have containers and you're
running in Kubernetes and you've got pods and resource limits and,
and other kinds of constraints that are happening
that aren't on your local machine.
All of a sudden you're saturating your local machine.
You're like, this is great.
I'm using all the resources.
Look at it go.
And now you release that to production
and watch Calamity and Chaos.
They get killed off because you've set something.
My websites and APIs and databases
all have production level RAM limits
and things like that
so that if they go completely crazy,
at least it's restricted to that one thing dying.
Not everything.
Yeah. Speaking of which, maybe you've got some ideas on what's next, Calvin.
Sure. I mean, I've been a big believer in containers. I really got turned on to this in
2020 and went down the path and now we're finally arrived where I believe developers should be
learning Kubernetes, even for local development. I feel like that whole front to back story is not
as complicated. The tooling has really come up to date. And so being able to use containers to get
reliable, repeatable builds, being able to use tools like tilt.dev, for example, as a developer
locally with my Kubernetes clusters, I can now have file systems syncing, use all my local tools.
This just literally does take the pains out of, they say microservice development. I think that's
a little bit of a buzzwordy explanation there.
I will say that it's good for Django development.
So if you check out the SCAF full stack template,
are you going to go-
Hold on, I'm fixing it for you here.
Perfect.
That's perfect.
This is exactly where we can use the same tools in production
that we use in development
so that it's much easier to track down issues.
Containers obviously unlocked a lot of those.
I feel like the true superpower of Kubernetes,
I think a lot of people love it for orchestration
or claim it's for orchestration.
I really love the fact that it's got a control plane
and a URL and an API.
So you can do things like continuous deployment.
So being able to deliver your code,
build an image, update a manifest
and have things just deploy
without you having to think twice about it
and be able to roll back with a click of a button
and using tools like Argo CD.
Argo CD is a great CI CD tool.
So we leverage it very heavily.
If you want a good example of how to do that,
you can check out that same full stack template.
We have all the pieces put in there for you in GitHub
to understand how that works.
So I think it's real.
I think developers should be embracing the container world,
especially if you have more than one developer.
As soon as you have a second developer,
this becomes an immediate payoff
in the work it took to put it in place.
And so I think it hits all the environments too,
like not just web dev, I think the data folks benefit
from containers, especially if you look at tools like Airflow,
be able to deploy that into containers,
be able to manage workers that are, you know,
Kubernetes based tasks.
So you can like natively handle asynchronous tasks
in a cluster and leverage all that power
you've got under the covers and scalability
and be able to scale out all the nodes.
You get a lot of win for adopting a tool that
I think a lot of people and me included used to consider
overkill.
MARK MANDEL: Yeah.
Well, let's put some layers on this.
First of all, preach on.
Preach on.
But you say containers, and you said Kubernetes,
and then some other things.
Do you have to know Docker and containers?
Is Docker synonymous with containers for you?
Do you have to know that before you're
successful with Kubernetes?
Like, what are-- there's a couple of layers of architecture
here, where are you telling people they should pay attention to?
I think you have to start with containers. Start with Docker.
The dog wants me to play with the toy over here.
If you start with the container, because you have to have a good container strategy,
even to be able to build and work with containers inside of any kind of a,
you know, whether it's Docker Compose or Swarm or, you know, using Fargate or some kind of
container app service, like on DigitalOcean.
- Yeah, count me down as Docker Compose, by the way.
I'm a big fan of this.
- Yeah, that's where we started.
I really enjoyed the ability to have Compose describe
my whole stack and be able to run the exact same version
of the exact right version of Redis,
the exact right version of Postgres,
the exact right version of whatever my dependent
other pieces are around me, because that matters.
I don't know if folks remember the Redis 608 to 609,
like a very minor release introduced a new feature
that was unusable and a very minor release backward.
So you want to be able to pin these things down
so you aren't chasing ghosts and weird edge cases
and containers enable that.
And whether it's Compose or Kubernetes, it doesn't matter.
You get that benefit.
I feel like the Kubernetes piece just takes that to the next level
a lot of the programmability of the web with an API and the fact that I'm not logging in.
Our preferred way to deploy Kubernetes onto servers is actually to use Talos Linux, which has no SSH
shell. There is not a way to shell into that box. It eliminates a whole class of security vulnerabilities
because there is no shell on the box whatsoever. You have to interact with it programmatically via
APIs and even the upgrades happen via the same, you know, API back planes. And just that level of
control, security, reliability, and comfort helped me sleep really well at night knowing where I've
deployed these things. Yeah. But you do need containers first. I think if you don't understand
the layers of the containers, but I think that's a, that's a quick read. There's some really good
resources online uh nana's tech world does a really good job of describing the changes
and she does an awesome job of like bringing that down to an every person most every person level
uh who would even care to touch it i i've i've some thoughts about containers and compose and
stuff that i want to throw on but i do especially want to hear peter contrast your take with the
you sort of say the same thing, but for data scientists,
do you need to pay attention to containers in data science?
Is that different?
I interviewed Matthew Rockland from Coiled recently,
and they've got a really interesting way to ship and produce your code
without containers that you actually interact with.
There's options, but.
Yeah, I think, I mean,
I think containers are just part of the technical landscape now,
so it's good to know them.
I think if we were to remove the capabilities of data science from everyone who doesn't know about containers,
that we would end up with a deeply impoverished user base, right?
The truth of the matter is that there are a lot of people out there today who,
if you think about what containers really do from a software development and a DevOps perspective,
it is a mechanism for your dog knows about to say something spicy.
No, I'm not trying to be controversial.
Just thinking about it on first principles, a container is a way for us to sort of format
and rationalize the target deployment environment
at within the boundaries of the box,
within the boundaries of a particular compute node
with an IP address or something like this.
And then Kubernetes takes the next level up,
which is, oh, if your dependencies for your application
is if you have like a microservices classic sort of example,
if your application is architected in such a way
that you need a lot of services to be running,
well, to format that,
you need to actually create a cluster of services
configured with particular network configuration
and various kinds of things.
So you're actually shipping a cluster
as the first thing you land and then you land,
you deploy the airport, then you land the plane.
So if you need to do that,
if the thing you're doing is so big,
and I think that we think about the US Air Force and Army,
like the reason why the American military
sort of has the dominance it has
is because of the logistics chain.
They can land just hundreds and hundreds of tons
of military hardware and food and personnel
into any location on the earth inside of 24 hours.
And this is sort of what Kubernetes gives you
is that ability to format at that level.
But at the end of the day, if you have a Jupyter Notebook,
well-known data set, you know how many CPU cores,
what kind of GPU you need to run a particular analytic,
that can seem like overkill
because you could say, spin up the CC2 box,
get me in there, spin up JupyterHub,
copy the thing over and now it's running, yay.
So I don't think that containers are necessary,
but in life we don't just do what's necessary, right?
I think it is useful to know something about
how to ship and work with modern IT environments
and cloud native kinds of environments.
So it's a useful thing to know.
But then again, like I said,
it's the goal for us as technologists
should be empowering those
who are less technically inclined than us.
And so removing the complexity for them
should be the thing that we should be trying to do.
And this is then to the spirit
I think Matt Rocklin talks to and what we on the sort of anaconda data science oriented side also
hope for right is that to make as much of this disappear in the background as possible for people
who don't want to learn it who don't need to know it necessarily yeah I think we want to get we all
want to score well on the plays well with others scorecard right so you know if we can deploy and
use containers that means it's much easier to onboard the next dev yeah and a lot of this
not everyone has to be an expert at it.
Correct.
A couple people set up a cluster or some Docker Compose system together,
and then you all get to use it.
It's a little bit like the people that work on Jupyter
have to do a lot of JavaScript and TypeScript,
so the rest of us don't have to do so much.
Right.
Although you just worked out a little HTML editing,
so I was pretty slick.
Yeah, I think here's a good question from a little bit earlier from Pamela,
but I think especially this one goes out to you, Calvin.
I think you've walked this path recently.
How much harder is Kubernetes versus Docker Compose
to learn for a web dev?
I think if you have a good template to start from,
that's where this becomes a no-brainer.
If you were to try and go learn all the things
about the Kubernetes stack orchestrators,
the storage bits, all these kind of pieces,
that could be really overwhelming.
Whereas Docker Compose, it's one file.
It lists your services.
It feels fairly readable.
It's just YAML.
Kubernetes is going to have a few more things going on under the covers.
But again, I'll point to our SCAF example as a minimal,
as little as you needed to get going version of being able to do Kubernetes
locally and in a sandbox and production environment.
So it scales up to all those pieces.
So as a web dev, you just develop your code locally.
You use your IDE, you're in PyCharm, you're in VS Code,
you're editing your files locally.
Tools like Tilt are kind of hiding a lot of that complexity
under the covers for you and synchronizing files two-way.
So if things happen in the container, for example,
you probably want to be able to build,
compile your dependencies with the hashes
in the target container environment
that you're going to release to.
Because if you did it locally and you're on Windows,
or on Mac or on Linux,
you're gonna get potentially different hashes,
different versions of different dependencies.
So those kinds of things need to be able to write back
from the container to your local file system
and Tilt enables that and takes that whole pain away.
I think Tilt was the big changing point for me,
the inflection point for me when I moved over
and fully embraced Kubernetes for local web dev.
- Interesting.
Over at Talk Python, I've got,
I think last time I counted 23 different things
running in Docker containers
sort of managed by a handful of Docker Compose things
that group them by what they're related to.
And it's been awesome.
It's been, it really lets you isolate things.
The server doesn't get polluted
with installing this version of Postgres
or that version of Mongo.
I think I've got two versions of Postgres,
another version of MongoDB and a few other things.
Yeah, and it just doesn't matter.
Do I RAM and see people?
20. Okay, good. And you can run in a one CPU or one server node, you don't need to have five
machines running with a control plane and all the pieces you will have the control plane, but you
can use like K3S is a minimal Kubernetes project that you can use to deploy, for example, on a
single EC2 instance, spin that up, deploy your containers. Now you can hook it up to your GitHub
actions, which I think we should also talk about is something people should learn. You hook that up
and away you go, you're now releasing without logging into a server and typing git pole and
potentially injecting into it unintended changes from your version control. It's a peace of mind
to be able to know and audit and know what you've released is exactly what you expected to get
released. So I want to wrap up this container side of things with two thoughts. First,
I'm a big fan of dogs.
I don't know if you guys know,
but I kind of understand what dogs say a little bit.
It's a little weird.
I believe Calvin's dog, I don't know,
Peter, back me up here.
I believe Calvin's dog said,
forget containers I edit in production.
I think that's what the dog said when it barked.
I'm not entirely sure.
I mean, he is a black dog.
You never know.
They're known for being rebels.
That's right, exactly.
Not the black sheep, but the black lab.
The black dog.
And then the second one I want to kind of close this out with
is C4Yourself out on YouTube says,
I like Python for low-code ML with PyCaret.
The problem is that Python is now up to 3.13.3,
and very soon 3.14.0, folks, while PyCaret only supports
up to 3.11.
And I think this is a good place to touch on reproducibility
and isolation.
Like you could make a container that just runs 3.11,
and it doesn't matter what your server has, right, Peter?
PETER LUBBERS: Yeah.
pop up the question again.
I was, I think it was just that PyCaret, yeah.
So this, I guess I don't really see the,
I don't see the problem.
Like this is a statement of fact, right?
The PyCaret only supports 3.11.
Are there features that you really want to see in 3.13
or that you really need to use in 3.13?
Or, I mean, there's, there are some changes, right?
Yeah, but it could be they get a new Linux machine that's Ubuntu, and it's got 312 on it.
Yep.
I mean, but you never, okay, this might be where the dog barks again, but you never use the system Python.
Well, right.
It doesn't matter what the system ships with.
I mean, what does macOS ship with?
I don't know.
You install, you either install a distribution like, you know, Anaconda, Miniconda, or something like this, or uv, using Python standalone, the virtual environments there, have their own, ship their own Python.
on. This is now I because I am who I am like on the Anaconda side of things, we've known
that you have in order to really isolate your Python installation, you really have to have
the interpreter itself be built with the same tool chain and the same versions of the tool
chain as all the libraries within it. And so this is what the conda universe, conda forge,
bioconda, we've been doing this forever. And then with uv, I think uv is really pushed
been spearheading the whole install a separate Python bit.
I know that Python has been there, but it's not –
I don't think it was a standard part of –
Yeah, it wasn't a standard part.
It wasn't a standard part of practice for people.
But I'm hoping that uv helps to change minds in this way as well.
But ultimately, if you do all the bits right,
you actually can have a isolated and separated,
perfectly isolated Python install without needing to use containerization.
Not there's anything wrong with containerization,
but just saying this is a solveable problem.
It's just so darn complicated to try to give
anyone best practices in the final packaging world.
Because some guidance can be wrong for somebody.
But in this case, yes,
you could absolutely use containers to isolate that,
or look to use conda or uv to create
It's an isolated install with just that version of Python just to run than PyCaret inside it.
Yeah, I feel like containers is a pure expression of an isolated environment where you can't get it messed up.
If you do anything, just know that the system Python is not your Python.
You shouldn't be allowed to use it.
It should be almost in a user private bin path that's not usable by people.
Calvin, I've been on a journey.
It's a failed journey, but it was a long, solid attempt.
I've been trying to remove Python from my system as a global concept, period.
But I'm a big fan of Homebrew, and too many things that Homebrew wanted.
And I know something's gone wrong when my app falls back to use in Python 3.9.
I'm like, no, Homebrew.
I deleted all my local Pythons, Pyamv and Homebrew, and any packages that depended on it.
And I went fully uv and uvx for any tools that would rely on it.
And then we've also moved to Nix.
We've started using Nix for our package management instead of homebrew for that reason.
Okay, sure.
Yeah, I will say, I think maybe the next one I want to throw out there to talk about is just is uv.
It was compelling when it was uv pip install and uv VENV.
But I think Peter really hit the nail on the head when once it sort of jujitsu'd Python
and said, okay, now here's the deal.
We manage Python.
Python doesn't manage us.
It just uncorked the possibilities, right?
Because you can say uv, VE, and V and specify a Python version, and it's not even on your
machine.
Two seconds later, it's both installed on your machine and you have a virtual environment
based on it.
And you don't have to think about it.
You know, Peter, you talked about PyEmp.
It's great, but it compiles Python on a machine that's super slow and error prone.
Because if your build tools in your machine aren't quite right, then well, sorry.
Compiling Python is no joke.
No, it isn't.
I used to do it for a while for talk Python in production.
It was like a 10 minute deal.
Yeah.
I had to automate it.
It was fine, but it took 10 minutes.
There was no rush in there.
And the great irony of this is that, again,
like we in the data science world have spent years trying to convince certain folks in the sort of non-data and science Python world that you can't solve the Python packaging problem without including the management of Python itself in it.
and we just got nowhere.
We're just repeatedly told PyCon after PyCon,
Packaging Summit after Packaging Summit.
The scope of a Python package manager
is to manage the things inside site packages
and anything outside of that,
system libraries, libping, libtif, opencv,
these things are outside of scope.
And many distributions,
there's Linux distros like Debian or Red Hat.
There's distribution vendors like us and Akana
that are cross-platform.
We were trying to make the case for this,
but we just kept not landing that argument.
UV comes along and does it,
and everyone's like, oh, this is totally the way to do it.
It's like, well, I guess the users finally have,
you know, I think that we can follow,
we can pave that cow path.
And I agree, it is utterly the way to do it.
And then what we're going to learn,
I think on the other side of that is,
oh, not only is it great to manage Python
as part of the whole thing,
but now we actually should care how we build that Python
because your choice of clang gcc your choice of what particular libraries you link in that determines
the tool chain for compiling everything else as well and especially we talk about data ai ml kinds
of libraries there's there's incompatibilities that will emerge as you try to install this install
that so um i gave a talk at pybay sorry to sort of toot my own horn a little bit but now go for
i gave a talk at pybay last fall about the five demons of python packaging where i try to unravel
Why is this perennial problem so gnarly and horrible?
And it's because there's many dimensions of it.
And most users only care about one and a half of those dimensions.
They just really want to install the damn package and just use it.
But if you're a maintainer, that's right.
You got to have the obligatory Blade Runner.
And anyway, so I put that talk together just to sort of get everyone on the same page to
understand why we have different tools, why distribution vendors, whether it's an Anaconda
or an Ubuntu, a Red Hat or Nix, right?
Why homebrew?
These things do matter.
And there's a reason people depend on these tools.
And anyway, I hope that people who care about Python packaging or want to understand more
deeply go and look at this talk because I do try to put time into each of their own topics
that make this so complicated.
And for Python in particular, because I hear a lot of people talking about, why don't we
Why isn't it as easy as Rust?
Or, oh, you know, npm is so nice.
Well, I don't hear that very often.
Is it?
No, no, no.
Actually, I don't hear a lot of praise for npm.
But, like, why doesn't JavaScript have this problem?
It's like, well, JavaScript doesn't have a pile of Fortran involved in it, right?
Many people don't know, but, you know, there's a fun thing in there.
I talk about the fact that if you want to use MBConvert,
if you want to use MBConvert to convert Notebook into a PDF,
you need a Haskell compiler because Pandoc depends on Haskell.
So like there's just things like that that are just our ecosystem is replete with these things.
And most users don't have to see it if the upstream folks, the distribution folks, the packaging people are doing their jobs right.
But that doesn't mean that it's not hard.
It doesn't mean that it's not real labor that goes into making it work.
Yeah, look in the chat.
Pamela points out that even using uv, there are now multiple ways, which is tricky.
And I would refer to myself as one of the old school people.
I still use uv kind of in a agnostic way.
Like if people don't want to use uv and they take one of my projects,
they can still use pip and they can still use pip-tools.
And so I'll use things like uv, V, ENV or uv pip install or,
you know, pip compile, especially to build out the pin requirements.
But if you don't like it, you just pip install -r requirements.txt
instead of using what I was doing, right?
Mm-hmm.
And then there's this other way of embracing,
like let it sort of manage your PyProject.tomal entirely
and create it and so on.
So I think there is a little bit of confusion,
but I think...
Yeah, it's probably good.
It's a huge support for the Python packaging community,
for sure.
It's good they made that compatibility path, though.
It helps people be comfortable
because change is hard.
As humans, we don't like change,
but this is a really good change.
That speed is a feature that Charlie talks about.
that 100% I'm on the onboard.
Yeah, I agree.
And it's changed even my Docker stuff.
Now, one of my Docker layers is just uv Python install.
Really, I think it just creates a virtual environment,
which also installs the Python.
And that's a two-second, one-time deal.
And it's off to the races.
It's really, really nice.
All right.
We have probably time for a few more topics.
However, if I put this out into the world,
it may consume all of the time as it does pretty much all of the GPUs.
What are your thoughts on Agenda coding?
What are your thoughts on LLMs and Agenda coding AI and that whole soup of
craziness?
I'm shocked how many people are not diving in headfirst on this.
I literally started talking to a developer last week and I was like,
hey, we tried Claude Code.
And they were like, no, what's that?
I was like, oh my.
Like, yeah, exactly.
Well, we've got Copilot.
I think the issue is in the enterprise,
a lot of people have opted to purchase Copilot
because it's a checkbox and a one-click purchase.
So it's easy.
But they're not giving them Copilot Studio,
which is the agentic version of it.
They're just like, yeah, you've got your LLMs now.
Go have fun.
I think they're really missing out on the true power
of like a tool that can inspect your file system
a tool that can like look at things and do actions now obviously that introduces risk so a lot of
these security people in these environments are not excited about that level of risk um i don't have a
good answer for that other than if you're a developer and you're going to turn on jt coding
you kind of have to like sign up and be accountable for what it's going to do i've got some ideas and
some concrete recommendations for you but peter i want to hear what you have to say first we so
first of all i think um vibe coding is simultaneously oversold at the same time
um i'm very bullish on where this can go the ultimately the transformers models and that style
of um current era ai has some structural mathematical limitations and the recent open ai
paper about hallucinations are inevitable and sort of part of the math uh sort of shows that yeah we're
We're going to end up, it is to some extent glorious high dimensional autocomplete.
But oh my God, is it glorious when it's right.
So it is steerable.
It's like trying to fly a very, very awkward airplane before we've really figured out aerodynamics.
But it kind of still does work.
So people should absolutely 100% be looking at what this can do for them.
And thinking really right now, like I would say actually the limitations, the known, the visible limitations of Vibe Coding,
should actually, you should be grateful for that
because that gives us time and space to think about
how would we design projects?
Because I know for myself, the way I code is I write doc strings
and comments and sort of class structures first.
And then I think about what needs to play with what
and you're writing documentation.
And if I can just have the code itself just get filled out with that,
like, holy crap, like, of course, right?
So everyone should be doing this so they can think about it
and really think about where this stuff will go
because it's definitely going to get better.
But if you're worried about the data leakage
and the compliance and all this other stuff,
use local models.
Go and buy, expense a couple of GPUs.
3090s actually work fine with the newer, smaller models.
If you work for a richer employer,
maybe you can get a couple of 5090s.
Sacrifice a gaming PC, come on.
It's also a gaming PC.
I have an M4 Mac with 64 gig of RAM, and it's wonderful.
I've got DevStroll running.
I've got the OSS GPT running.
All those tools run on a just base model.
Well, a base model.
A little super tough Mac.
Yeah, I have a 32 gig Mac mini running here,
and I'm running the 20 billion parameter OpenAI model on it
just to be shared with all my computers and my laptop.
Yeah, and there's also, you know,
the Chinese models are really freaking good, you know?
And the, I mean, I think, I don't know what,
we'll see what happens with CES next year,
but I feel like this year was the year of small models.
This year was the year, I mean,
we started the year with DeepSeek, right?
And so it's like not just Chinese labs saying,
we don't need your stinking whatever,
but over the course of the year, we got Kimi,
we got Quinn, we got GLM, we got,
we're just going to keep getting these.
And that's not even, that's just on the code
and the text prompting side.
That's not even on image generation.
Some of the Chinese image and video generation models are just jaw-droppingly good.
So I think what we're going to see here is by the beginning of next year,
well, this is a 25-26 podcast, right?
So in 26, you probably have no excuse to say, why are you not?
You know, professional CAD and engineering people have big workstations.
As a dev, maybe you just have a big workstation now
or a fat 128-gig unified memory M4 Mac,
but you're just going to have that as your coding station
and everything is local,
you're going to be careful with tool use, of course,
but still, like, you just run it all locally.
I think as a developer,
one of the key skills you should learn
is going to be context engineering
and using sub-processes.
Like, the models now support, you know,
basically spinning off parallel instances of themselves.
And you can spin off parallel instances
with a limited amount of context
to kind of really shape how they understand things.
Because Google reintroduced the Gemini
with like a 1 million token context window limit.
So what?
What are you going to do with that?
It's really not useful to just feed a million tokens into it
because it can't,
it's just as much as you tried to like-
Well, it tapers off at the end as well.
It's not really a million tokens.
Right, you don't get a million tokens.
And it's also,
it's just going to be thoroughly confused
by all the context you just threw at it.
But if you can give a really narrow focus context,
small diffs,
that's one of the things I liked about Aider Chat.
If you've not checked out AdrChat, it has a diff mode that really limits the amount of tokens it consumes.
So actually it's a little more efficient on tokens than like cloud code, even if you're using the anthropic models the same way.
Because it'll do diffs and send smaller context.
And if you can leverage that with like sub models or sub prompts and Goose, the chat agent from Block has recipes that actually operate in like a sub model.
So it's basically like you're building your own little tools
that are just descriptions of like what MCP pieces
it should use, what tools should be available
and use this context and only pass me back that bit
and throw away the extra context once you're done.
So you're not polluting your context window
with a whole bunch of unneeded operation.
And now you get back really what's needed
for whatever you're trying to work on.
Yeah.
So I wanna kind of take it a little bit higher level
back real quick.
Calvin, I'm with you.
If you have not seen this,
And I've talked to a lot of really smart devs who are like, yeah, I tried Copilot or I tried one of these things.
And their experience is largely, I think, with the multi-line autocomplete.
And to me, that, I just turn that off.
That's like garbage.
It's not garbage, but it's, let me put it more kindly.
Half of the time, hitting tab is glorious.
And the other half, I'm like, I want the first half, but the second half is wrong.
So do I hit tab and then go down and delete it again?
You know what I mean?
I got to like, it's giving me too much and it's not quite right.
But the agentic tool using part is stunning.
Not with the cheap models, but with the models that cost like $20 a month.
It's a huge difference from the very cheap model.
Which is like, that's not even a latte a week, right?
Like we're talking to an audience of probably mostly professional developers, right?
You know, a hundred bucks a month, $200 a month for what literally is transforming the future of your entire industry is worth it.
like why would you not subscribe to your and your employer should be paying for this like they should
be handing you all well but if they do actually so here's the thing i'm actually two minds of this
i think every dev for their own purposes for their own applications you're paying for their own
because the employers will have limitations on what they're allowed to use they may have to sign up for
an enterprise thing which has then data you know data retention policies yada yada yada and you
want to just go full blast what is absolute cutting edge being released by various things yes but i
would still again my little you know nerd like open source heart would not be uh stated unless
i've made the comment here please play with local models please like have do work in a data
sovereignty mode um because this is actually the closest the first time i think we've had real tech
that could potentially move people away from a centralized computing model which has been i think
so deleterious to our world, actually.
And the last thing that we don't have time for,
but the last thing I was going to just throw a shout out for
was for people to check out Beware,
because that is the way that we can build Python mobile applications
and really be shipping applications that don't necessarily,
like we should be deploying to mobile.
So many Python developers are web devs,
storing state in the Postgres somewhere,
and we're part of that data concentration, data gravity problem.
Whereas if we flip the bit and just learn for ourselves,
How do we Vibecode an actual iOS platformer?
Like, let's go do that, right?
Or an Android thing, which is a little bit easier to deal with.
These are things that we can actually do as Python.
Totally doable, though, yeah.
Yeah, totally doable.
I want to give a shout out to you, Peter, and Anaconda in general for all the support for Beware and some of the PyScript and some of those other projects.
Those are important ones, and yeah, good work.
Just try to fight the good fight.
Yeah, for sure.
Thank you.
I'm not quite done with this AI thing, though.
I do want to say, I do want to point out this thing called Klein that recently came out.
That's really pretty interesting.
Have you guys heard of this?
Yep.
Yeah.
So it's open source.
It's kind of like cursor, but the big difference is they don't charge for inference.
You just put in an API key and, or you put in a link to a URL to a local model.
So you can use local with it.
Yeah.
And I mean, if you're using local models and you really want to go all in on the data sovereignty
pieces use tools like little snitch on your mac to know if it's sending something someplace you're
you didn't request it to send to you can be totally eyes wide open and maybe exercise a
little more reckless abandon if you know that the tool like that can catch an outbound connection
that you didn't expect yeah i think i'll give you how many how many how much i don't want to burn
I will give you guys an example that I think probably will--
if you've done a lot of web development and web design
mixed, this will probably catch your attention.
So I want to add some new features to talkpython.fm.
I got some cool whole sections coming and announcements.
But talkpython.fm was originally created and designed
in 2015 on Bootstrap.
Do you know how out of date 2015 Bootstrap is with
modern day front end frameworks?
A lot. But there's like 10,000 lines of HTML
designed in Bootstrap, early Bootstrap.
I'm like, oh.
Hey, it still renders great on my phone though.
And the LLMs are very aware of old Bootstrap documentation.
I know.
And issues.
Peter, it looks great and it works well.
But here's the thing, I want to add a whole bunch of
new features and sections to it.
Now, I've got to design that from scratch.
I'm like, oh, I can't do this in Bootstrap 3.
I just don't have the willpower for it.
It's going to make it so hard, you know?
And so I'm like, well, I really should redesign it,
but that's got to be weeks of work.
And one evening around 4 o'clock, I'm just hanging out,
you know, enjoying the outside, sitting, working on my computer,
trying to take in a little more summer before it's gone.
And I'm like, you know what?
I bet Claude Sonnet and I bet we could do this quicker than
two hours later the entire site 5,000 lines of CSS 10,000 lines of template HTML files all
rewritten in Bulma modern clean doesn't look at all different except for the few parts I'm like
oh I don't like that rewrite that actually to the point where you just take a screenshot of what you
do want throw it in there and go make it look like this oh yeah okay I see the picture let's make it
look like that. And it's just a couple hours. That would be pulling your hair out the most tedious,
painful work for a week or two. And now it's, if I want to add something to the site, it's just,
oh yeah, it's just modern Bulma. Off it goes. Or I could have chose Tailwind or whatever.
I think Bulma works a little better with AIs because it doesn't have build steps and all
that kind of stuff. It's a little more straightforward. But those are the kinds of
things that like, literally I wrote down a markdown plan. I said, here's what we're going to do.
and I planned it out with AI.
Then I said, okay, step one, step two.
And we just worked it through until it was done.
There's a few little glitches.
I'm like, this looks weird.
Here's a screenshot.
Fix it.
Okay.
AI is really good at these kinds of tasks.
Yeah.
And if people have not seen this in action,
I think it just doesn't.
They're like, I tried to use ChatGPT
and it gave me an answer,
but it doesn't help that much.
I could write that.
Or I used a free cheat model
and it got it wrong
and I had to fix more than it helped me.
There are these new tools that are crazy.
There's something that people don't,
think have an intuitive feeling for because they're they're encountering a cognitive reactive system
for the first time uh i'm not saying sentient or conscious by the way but just cognitive and so
it's sort of like it's it it's going to be as deep as how you probe it so if you ask it a dumb shallow
thing it will give you a dumb shallow response if you you know but if you get really deep or nerdy
and i was using it to i was using early incarnations actually a couple years back i
first figured out this effect, I was reading some philosophy books, as one does. And I was thinking,
well, I could use this as a co-reading tutor. And I noticed I would just ask for some reason,
give me some summaries. I'm like, well, that's reasonable, but you know, okay, whatever.
But then as I got deeper into some of the content and I was asking for contrasting opinions about
different, from different other perspectives and some critiques and all this stuff. And I started
getting into it, it would go very deep. And this is like GPT, just 4.0, it just come out kind of
thing like time frame so i think the same thing is true now especially with like gpt5 research i've
had feedback from friends who are like yeah some people say five is a nothing burger but five
research is a thing because i'm able to do this is this other person not me but this other
person i quote i'm able to get graduate level feedback like stuff that is deeply researched in
arcane parts of mathematics and i check it and i mean i use claude to check the gpt5 and it basically
is correct from as far as I can tell.
So I think the thing to go to these people with is like,
if you're not getting anything out of it,
it's because you're not squeezing hard enough, right?
Approach it as if it were a super intelligence
and see how little it disappoints you
because it will not disappoint you that often
if you really get into it.
Yeah, I want to take a slightly different take,
but I 100% agree.
I think you should treat it a little bit
like a junior developer who knows 80% of what you want,
but they just kind of gas into that last 20%.
And if you gave this work to a junior dev
and they got it 95% wrong
and there's a little mistake
and you had to go and say,
hey, really good,
but this part you got to fix up a little bit,
that would be a success for that junior developer.
I don't know why we expect 100% perfection
if there's any kind of flaw whatsoever
from such a creation process
that like, well, it's broken, it's junk.
Like you're expected to make a few mistakes
and you've got to be there to guide it.
But the huge amount it gets right is so valuable.
This doesn't negate the standard software development lifecycle process
of having code review.
You still need to have those kinds of things in place.
And the code review is you with your junior developer who's an LLM now.
Well, yeah, the SCLC isn't negated.
But the thing I think that's deeply counterintuitive is we're used to,
I mean, the modality.
Think about how this manifests.
We're typing things still into a text window, right?
And so we as developers are used to that being a very precise, predictable input, output transformational process.
We're not used to the idea of coding with a semantic paintbrush, right?
Like a Chinese or Japanese calligrapher doesn't care exactly which horsehair got ink on which part of the paper.
They got a brush and they're like doing their calligraphy.
And I think we have to get over ourselves and think about I'm painting with a semantic paintbrush, splattering it, certainly using my fingers with keyboard.
But soon it'll be dictation, right?
And so we're really splattering ideas into this canvas, and it's auto-rendering this stuff for us into a formal system.
And I think just the modality of, wow, you can see the clouds are going over the sun, and my color temperature changes in my video.
Is the AI doing it?
The AI is doing it because they're passionate about this, right?
So no, but I think that's the key thing is we are used to this modality of fingers on keyboard textual input being an input to a formal system, not an informal probabilistic system, which is what these things are.
So once you make that mental bit flip, then then it's like you just learn to embrace it. Right.
Yeah, I think voice is a great option here.
We use Fireflies for our meeting recording bot.
But you can also just open up your phone and launch the Fireflies app and start talking to it.
And it has an MCP server.
You can go into Claude Code and be like,
grab the last transcript where I was just talking about this and pull it in,
or have a discussion about the specifications,
about the journey, the epic,
the customer's story,
and bring those in as artifacts really, really quickly now.
Yeah. Holder ballgame.
It is a crazy ballgame.
The whole new ballgame.
Yeah. All right.
Anything else that is burning on your list of topics
that we should do a lightning round
'cause we're out of time on.
- We should lightning round on DuckDB.
I think I agree.
- Okay, you two riffed on it 'cause I'm knowledgeable,
but you all are the ones who use it.
- If you've not played with it,
it is an incredible little embedded,
like kind of SQL lite, but way more.
And if you've got files on a disk someplace,
they're now your database.
If you've got stuff in an S3 bucket someplace,
that's now your database like it it's incredibly flexible it's got so many like cool extensions
built into it like it can do geospatial stuff it's got json capabilities that are like really
incredible i mean the speed is a little bit mind-blowing it's kind of like the first time
you use uv or rough like how is that so fast and then you use duckdb and it's it's really i i think
folks should go check it out and learn a little more because it's it may change how you think
think about deploying an at edge thing or a little local thing or even a big data analysis piece,
you may actually be able to fit that into memory on your machine and DuckDB and get some incredible
results out of it. I'm sure Peter has way more to talk about this than I do, but I don't use it that
much. But man, if I had a use case for it, I would be 100% picking that tool up. Yeah, DuckDB is a
fantastic little piece of technology. I don't mean little in a pejorative sense here, but
But at a technical level, I would say it is a highly portable, very efficient, and very versatile database engine.
So the name is almost wrong because it exactly liberates you from databases.
We are used to thinking of databases at places where data goes to, well, not die, but to be housed at rest and have an extreme amount of gravity attracted to it.
And then DuckDB takes the opposite of that.
It says any data representation you have should be searchable or queryable if only you had the right engine.
And it inverts the whole thing, which is the brilliant piece of it.
And again, what data isn't just representation.
It's someone on a disk or over a network or a network.
So it pairs very nicely with the PyData stack of tools.
And so I know one of the topics we had on here as well was Arrow.
So if you care about representation for a variety of reasons, then Arrow is great.
If you want a query interface, you want a SQL-style query interface that's agnostic as to representation, that's your DuckDB.
And, of course, the fact that it plays so well with WebAssembly means Edge, Cloudflare workers or whatever, or PyScript and WebAssembly workers.
We have some demonstration examples using PyScript
where you have an entire analytics stack
running entirely within the browser,
full on, you got pandas and psychic image,
scikit-learn, map plotlib stuff going on.
And you've got, you're hitting S3 buckets
with full blown SQL queries using DuckDB
because it all runs in WebAssembly.
And this is just a taste.
I mean, none of this is mainstream yet.
I think some of these use cases are a little bit on the edge,
but the vision this takes us to as a world
where we really are just we're living a much more portable world so your things can just move you
can give someone a web page a static web page it's a full-blown app and actually if you look at web
gpu and transformers js web lm kinds of stuff you can fit a little tiny model in there actually and
you have a totally local entirely client-side experience uh with with ai in it so yeah i'm
very excited about this and ducktp is really part of that equation yeah bring your query engine to
where your data is.
Exactly.
As opposed to the other way around, which always takes time.
Yeah.
Excellent.
I know people are very excited about it.
It's got the built into your program.
You don't have to run another server aspect, which I think is good as well.
And the WebAssembly stuff.
Maybe there won't be local DB and local SQL or WebSQL, all those things that we just do
DuckDB in the browser with WebAssembly.
be nice
so
very interesting
we barely scratched the surface
you guys like there's a more there's more people
need to know but I think these are probably
some of the hotter topics
we may have to do a part two
but a 2026 edition that's just
a continuation but
if people take the time
invest in putting some energy into these
things it's going to make a big difference I think
thanks for being on the show
and
yeah it's been great
yeah this was awesome thank you so much for having us
yeah thanks Michael I enjoy talking about all the
cool new tech and tools
bye guys